README.md, before:

# kodb-util
`kodb-util` is a database utility tool created to help in the development of the OpenKO project.

The utility aims to:

1. Create/Import the OpenKO database structure and data
2. Export the structure, data, and jsonSchema database properties from the configured database

## Program configuration
Configure your database connection information in `kodb-util-config.yaml`; As this file is on gitignore, a template is provided in `kodb-util-config.yaml.template`

This utility mutates the configured user (default: `knight`) as part of its import and export functionality.  For local development you can:
* Leave databaseConfig.user blank to use Windows Authentication
* use your `sa` login
* configure a user with similar permissions

You'll need a copy of `OpenKO-db` to run this program against.  This is set up as a git submodule (explained below), but 
you can override it in your settings with schemaConfig.dir

(TODO:  Link OpenKO-db repo when opened under OpenKO org)

## Dependencies
The following commands assume that you have a terminal open in the root folder of the project.

The `OpenKO-db` project is a submodule; We make use of:
* `OpenKO-db/templates` to generate DBs, Schemas, Users, and Logins.
* `OpenKO-db/jsonSchema/tableDef.go` structures to bind the json schema during -exportJsonSchema

We update/generate the content of:
* `OpenKO-db/jsonSchema`: the -exportJsonSchema flag reads the table structure of the database and syncs the *.json properties; 
* `OpenKO-db/ManualSetup`: contains the *.sql files generated by the export functions. `6_InsertData_*.sql` files are in the import process.
* `OpenKO-db/StoredProcedures`: manual dump of StoredProcedure files that we use in the import process.  TODO: Export support
* `OpenKO-db/Views`: manual dump of Views that we use in the import process.  TODO: Export support

To get the submodule for the first time:
```shell
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

To get updates after the submodule has been pulled for the first time:
```shell
git submodule update --recursive --remote
```

This utility is programmed with Go 1.24+.  You'll need to install the language if you want to build locally. See https://go.dev/doc/install

If Go is correctly installed on your path, you should be able to run `go version` in your terminal and get version
information output:
```
PS C:\> go version
go version go1.24.1 windows/amd64
```
To download Go dependencies, run:
```shell
go mod download
```

To run the application, run:
```shell
go run kodb-util.go
```

Without any arguments (or -usage), you should get a usage prompt like this:
```
|---------------------------|
| OpenKO Database Utilities |
|---------------------------|
No arguments provided:
Usage of kodb-util.exe:
  -batchSize int
        Batch sized used when importing table data (default 16)
  -clean
        Clean drops any configured users and drops the databaseConfig.dbname database
  -config string
        Path to config file, inclusive of the filename (default "kodb-util-config.yaml")
  -dbpass string
        Database connection password override
  -dbuser string
        Database connection user override
  -exportAll
        Export both the structure of the database, and the data
  -exportData
        Export table data from the database
  -exportJsonSchema
        Export table properties from the database to update jsonSchema.  Not part of -exportAll
  -exportStructure
        Export the structural elements of the database
  -import
        Runs clean and imports the contents of OpenKO-db/ManaualSetup, StoredProcedures, and Views
  -schema string
        OpenKO-db schema directory override; in most cases you'll just want to use the default git submodule location
```

## Building the utility program
To build `kodb-util.exe`, run the following command in this directory:
```shell
go build
```
## TODOs
* Export support for StoredProcedures and Views

Commit message:

feature/templates-and-gorm Review changes, Views/Stored Proc Export support

README.md, after:

# kodb-util
`kodb-util` is a database utility tool created to help in the development of the OpenKO project.

The utility aims to:

1. Create/Import the OpenKO database structure and data
2. Export the structure, data, and jsonSchema database properties from the configured database

## Program configuration
Configure your database connection information in `kodb-util-config.yaml`. As this file is on `.gitignore` a template is provided in `kodb-util-config.yaml.template`

This utility mutates the configured user (default: `knight`) as part of its import and export functionality.  For local development you can:
* Leave databaseConfig.user blank to use Windows Authentication
* use your `sa` login
* configure a user with similar permissions

You'll need a copy of `OpenKO-db` to run this program against.  This is set up as a git submodule (explained below), but 
you can override it in your settings with schemaConfig.dir

(TODO:  Link OpenKO-db repo when opened under OpenKO org)

## Dependencies
The following commands assume that you have a terminal open in the root folder of the project.

The `OpenKO-db` project is a submodule; we make use of:
* `OpenKO-db/templates` to generate databases, schemas, users, and logins
* `OpenKO-db/jsonSchema/tableDef.go` structures to bind the json schema during -exportJsonSchema

We update/generate the content of:
* `OpenKO-db/jsonSchema`: the -exportJsonSchema flag reads the table structure of the database and syncs the *.json properties
* `OpenKO-db/ManualSetup`: contains the *.sql files generated by the export functions. These files are used by the import process to populate a database

To get the submodule for the first time:
```shell
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

To get updates after the submodule has been pulled for the first time:
```shell
git submodule update --recursive --remote
```

This utility is programmed with Go 1.24+.  You'll need to install the language if you want to build locally. See https://go.dev/doc/install

If Go is correctly installed on your path, you should be able to run `go version` in your terminal and get version
information output:
```
PS C:\> go version
go version go1.24.1 windows/amd64
```
To download Go dependencies, run:
```shell
go mod download
```

To run the application, run:
```shell
go run kodb-util.go
```

Without any arguments (or -usage), you should get a usage prompt like this:
```
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               OpenKO Database Utilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
No arguments provided:
Usage of kodb-util.exe:
  -batchSize int
        Batch sized used when importing table data.  Valid range [2-999], if invalid value specified will default to 16 (default 16)
  -clean
        Clean drops any configured users and drops the databaseConfig.dbname database
        Path to config file, inclusive of the filename (default "kodb-util-config.yaml")
  -dbpass string
        Database connection password override
  -dbuser string
        Database connection user override
  -exportAll
        Export both the data and structure of the database
  -exportData
        Export table data from the database
  -exportJsonSchema
        Export table properties from the database to update jsonSchema.  Not part of -exportAll
  -exportProcs
        Export the stored procedures of the database
  -exportStructure
        Export the structural elements of the database
  -exportViews
        Export the views of the database
  -import
        Runs clean and imports the contents of OpenKO-db/ManaualSetup, StoredProcedures, and Views
  -schema string
        OpenKO-db schema directory override; in most cases you'll just want to use the default git submodule location
```

## Building the utility program
To build `kodb-util.exe`, run the following command in this directory:
```shell
go build
```
